# Introduction

The ESP32-S2 microcontoller has a true DAC (Digital to Analog
Converter.) This feature is relatively rare in microcontollers but it
enables some unique experiments. In this project you will use the DAC to
control the voltage to a device, and four of the ADC's (Analog to
Digital Converters) to measure the device's response. The simplest set
up is measuring resistance (which is the inverse of the conductance.)
The microcontroller will measure both the current through and voltage
across a resistor as the voltage across it changes and fit the result to
a line to get the resistance. I describe in an appendix how to implement
a *four-wire* measurement in which two wires carry the current to a
remote resistor and two wire are for measuring the voltage drop.

To make the project more interesting you will also wire a Type K
thermocouple to a microcontroller breakout board using a digital
protocol. Type K thermocouples can read from -200 Â°C to 1350 Â°C. You can
use them to measure the temperature coefficient of the resistance and
the transition temperature of high T~c~ superconductors.

You can also use this project to measure the I-V curve of diodes and how
that changes with temperature and other projects.

# Bill of Materials

Items needed with approximate cost.

-   Case, 3D printed -- \$2 of PLA filament.

-   Half breadboard -- \$5.

-   Lolin S2Mini microcontroller board -- \$5.

    -   Option: TinyS2 -- ESP32-S2 Development Board from AdaFruit --
        \$19.
    -   Adafruit ESP32-S2 Feather -- \$18.

-   Thermocouple breakout board, MAX31855 -- \$15.

-   Type K thermocouple -- \$10.

-   Miscellaneous electronic supplies:

    -   100 Î© resistor.
    -   Sample resistor \<= 100 Î©.
    -   Hook up wire, 22AWG Solid Core.

-   **Total**: \$56

**Tools and Equipment**:

-   Computer.

-   USB C cable.

-   Soldering iron.

-   Wire strippers.

-   Optional:

    -   Wire cutter.
    -   Needle-nosed pliers.

# 

# The Lolin S2Mini

![Figure 1: S2Mini pinout. The only DAC pins are 17 on the inside row
and 18. Not all pins have ADC's. We will use pins 9, 11, and
12.](Figs/S2Mini_I2C_Pins_Edit.jpg "fig:"){width="3in"
height="2.05in"}The pin assignments for the S2Mini are in *Figure 1*. To
use on a breadboard, I only use the outside pins. Almost any pin can be
used for digital in/out and ADC, but only pins 18 (and 17 which is not
wired up) have a DAC which can be used to output a voltage. The DAC has
8-bits of resolution, so setting pin 18 from 0 to 255 (0xff) gives an
output voltage of 0 to 3.3 V (approximately.)

## Getting Started

For the first test, (assuming you have CircuitPython loaded on the
S2Mini) plug the S2Mini into a breadboard and wire pin 18 to pin 16. You
will set the voltage of pin 18 and read the voltage on pin 16.

Plug the S2Mini into your laptop and start the *Thonny* IDE. Click
*****Tools***** â†’ *****Options...***** â†’ *****Interpreter*****. Choose
*****CircuitPython***** for the interpreter and click on the
*****Port***** dropdown menu and select your S2Mini.

If the python prompt, *****\>\>\> , *****doesn't appear in the lower
window, click the Stop icon, ðŸ›‘ , in the toolbar. You can also try
typing \<ctrl>C and \<ctrl>D in the shell window.

## DAC Complication

The DAC's on the ESP32S2 have internal pull-up resistors, so![Figure 2:
DAC output on pin 18 with different pulldown
resistors.](Pictures/10000201000001B0000001B0F975A7838422CFD2.png "fig:"){width="3in"
height="3in"} to get a decent output voltage range you need to supply a
pulldown resistor. *Figure 2* shows the output voltage versus DAC
setting for different pulldown resistors. To get a good range on the
DAC, we need to have 1 kÎ© or less connected to the DAC pin. Later when
we design a circuit to measure conductance, we need to make sure it has
an equivalent resistance of 1 kÎ© or less.

# Project 1 -- Take DAC Voltage versus DAC Counts Data

See *Figure 3 *for a picture of the circuit.![Figure 3: Wiring for DAC
test.](Pictures/10000000000006E8000008BC9762D98B22CDBCF6.jpg "fig:"){width="3in"
height="3.7902in"}

-   Plug the S2Mini into a breadboard.
-   Wire GND to the blue "--" power rail.
-   Wire pin 16 to row 12 after the S2Mini.
-   Wire pin 18 to the same row.
-   Wire a 1 k kÎ© resistor from the same row and to the ground rail.

## The Code

First you need to load the libraries we will be using to the S2Mini.
From the zip file, locate the folder lib. Drag it to the CIRCUITPY disk.
If it prompts you that the folder there exists, answer Replace, or copy
anyway.

In your code the libraries (sometimes called *modules*) are imported
first. The library ***board*** imports the pins available for the
specific board and a few other items. I encourage that you explore these
libraries. You can do that at the python prompt by typing, for example,

***\>\>\> import board***

***\>\>\> ******help******(board)***

***\>\>\> ******dir(board)*****

I do this a lot with libraries and objects so I can learn what can be
done with CPy. The other source of information is searching the
[CircuitPython web site](https://docs.circuitpython.org/en/latest/). The
library *****analogio***** handles DAC and ADC functions for
microcontrollers. I also import *****sleep***** and *****sqrt***** from
standard python libraries.

This file for this code is ***testDAC.py***.

import board

import analogio

from time import sleep

from math import sqrt

Next I create variables that parameterize the program behavior. I
strongly advocate the programming proverb *Never bury a constant in your
code; assign it to a variable or constant at the top of your code*. Here
I had to look up which pins are DAC compatible (pins 17 & 18) and which
are ADC compatible (many pins.)

For each data point I I sleep for *****tADC***** seconds to give time
for the DAC to settle then average over *****nAvg***** points. The
variable *****counts***** sets the DAC voltage, the variables
*****countsMax***** and *****countsInc***** set the loop for stepping
the DAC. The CircuitPython library maps all DAC's to 16 bits, so I use
hex to code the maximum value as *****0xffff*****. Setting an increment
of *****0x1000***** gives 16 data point in the scan. I find hex easier
than remembering 65535 and 4096.

dacPin = board.IO18

adcPin = board.IO16

nAvg = 10

tADC = 0.01

countsMax = 0xffff

countsInc = 0x1000

To grab a pin for analog use, the ***analogio*** library does a lot of
work for you. I set up the variable ***dToV*** to convert counts to
voltage for ADC readings.

dac = analogio.AnalogOut(dacPin)

adc = analogio.AnalogIn(adcPin)

dToV = adc.reference_voltage / 0xffff

In this section you can input a comment that will get stored in the data
file. I used this to describe the pull down resistors. I also print
important information about the microcontoller and the code. The
***board_id*** variable describes the microcontoller, in this case the
string is ***lolin_s2_mini***. Note I print out the parameters for the
run. Starting these lines with *****\#***** makes it easier to import
the data into an analysis program.

comment = input(\"Enter comment: \")

print(f\"\# board_id = {board.board_id}\")

print(f\"\# dacPin: {dacPin}, adcPin: {adcPin}, dToV: {dToV}\")

print(f\"\# nAvg: {nAvg}, tADC: {tADC}\")

print(f\"\# {comment}\")

Next I define a function that returns an ADC reading and its standard
deviation. This is where the parameters ***nAvg*** and ***tADC*** are
used. I strongly encourage my students to always be thinking about
uncertainties in measurement. In this case the standard deviation tell
you how spread out the measurements are.

def readADC():

sum = 0.0

sumSq = 0.0

for i in range(nAvg):

reading = adc.value \* dToV

sum += reading

sumSq += reading \* reading

sleep(tADC)

avg = sum / nAvg

std = sumSq / nAvg - avg \* avg

if std \<= 0.0:

std = 0

else:

std = sqrt(sumSq / nAvg - avg \* avg)

return (avg, std)

Below is the main loop. It set the DAC value, sleeps, then reads the ADC
and prints the result. I always use a *****\#***** in the first line of
comments, and make the data in comma separated columns, the CSV format.
This makes reading and analyzing the data easy. Also note I manually add
the last point otherwise I wouldn't get a data point for the maximum
value of the DAC.

for out in range(0, countsMax, countsInc):

print(f\"{out}, \", end=\"\")

dac.value = out

sleep(0.1)

(V, dV) = readADC()

print(f\"{V}, {dV}\")

out = 0xffff

print(f\"{out}, \", end=\"\")

dac.value = out

sleep(0.1)

(V, dV) = readADC()

print(f\"{V}, {dV}\")

These last two lines release the pins. If these lines are not included,
when you rerun the code it can't grab the pins.

dac.deinit()

adc.deinit()

## Analyzing the DAC Data

The output is written in the* Shell* window at the bottom of* Thonny*.*
*Below is an example run of the output:

\# board_id = lolin_s2_mini

\# dacPin: board.IO18, adcPin: board.IO16, dToV: 5.03547e-05

\# nAvg: 10, tADC: 0.01

\# 1 k pulldown

0, 0.241481, 0.00211784

4096, 0.297284, 0.00316913

8192, 0.487575, 0.00245358

12288, 0.672477, 0.00304931

16384, 0.869571, 0.00223759

20480, 1.06437, 0.00316442

24576, 1.26018, 0.00292969

28672, 1.45058, 0.00276214

32768, 1.64508, 0.00169146

36864, 1.85078, 0.000976563

40960, 2.04587, 0.00195313

45056, 2.23348, 0.00195313

49152, 2.43148, 0.00239208

53248, 2.63266, 0.00338291

57344, 2.68199, 0.00276214

61440, 2.68199, 0.00276214

65535, 2.68199, 0.00276214

I cut and paste this into an editor, edit to delete any extra lines and
save it with a file name that encodes the date and time the data was
taken, ***2022-04-28-1546.csv***, for example.

I use jupyter notebooks running python to analyze the data. One nice
thing about the CSV data format is that is can be read by many programs
including spreadsheets like Microsoft Excel. *Figure 4* is a plot from
my jupyter notebook.

![Figure 4: DAC output voltage versus input counts. The curve depends on
the value of the pulldown
resistor.](Pictures/1000020100000288000001B086D9BF1E3E30BB41.png "fig:"){width="4.1472in"
height="2.7646in"}The curve looks linear between 5000 and 55000 counts
and it does not go down to zero volts nor up to 3.3 V. These are
limitations we will have to work with when we make a conductivity
measurement.

I took the data in *Figure 2* using this program and different pull down
resistors.

# Project 2: Two-Wire Conductivity Measurement

![Figure 5: Schematic for a two-wire resistance
measurement.](Pictures/100002010000014B000000D35688AD8213EE80E4.png "fig:"){width="2.8709in"
height="1.8299in"}The next project will use the microcontoller to
measure the resistance (inverse of the conductivity) of a device.

The basic idea,* Figure 5*,* *is that the voltage drop across the
sensing resistance is the current through the sample. So

$$I_{\mathit{sample}} = \frac{V_{0} - V_{1}}{R_{\mathit{sense}}}$$

and

$$V_{\mathit{sample}} = V_{1}$$.

So

$$R_{\mathit{sample}} = \frac{V_{\mathit{sample}}}{I_{\mathit{sample}}}$$

![Figure 6: V0 and V1 versus DAC Counts for a 60 Ohm resistor as a
sample.](Pictures/1000020100000288000001B009A5D8F00E3F7EDA.png "fig:"){width="3in"
height="2in"}We will step V~DAC~ from 0 to 3.3V, so a graph of
*V*~*sample*~ versus *I*~*sample*~ should be a straight line with a
slope of *R*~*sample*~. For each DAC setting, we will read *V*~*0*~ and
*V*~*1*~ multiple times and get an uncertainty for each. We will carry
the uncertainty through the linear fit to calculate an uncertainty for
the resistance.

I wired this circuit up with a 100 Î© sense resistor and 69 Î© resistor
for the sample.

*Figure 6* shows a graph of *V*~*0*~ and *V*~*1*~ versus *DAC* setting.
You can see at counts less than about 4000 the curves flattens out or
slightly rises. I believe this is an effect of the pull up resistor. At
the higher end, the voltage does not go above 2.58 V. I believe this is
a limit of the ADC. In between the two graphs look linear. In the
software I will limit the data to DAC counts to greater than 4000 and
voltages less than 2.50.

In the software I actually average some number of ADC readings together
at each DAC step. This gives more accuracy to each data point and I
calculate the standard deviation for the point, so I also have an
uncertainty estimate for each point.

![Figure 7: Linear fit of V~sample~ versus I~sample~.
](../Figures/2022-05-24-1234-05.png "fig:"){width="4in"
height="2.6665in"}I do a linear fit with uncertainty to the data. This
gives both a measurement of the sample resistance, but also an
uncertainty estimate for the resistance. *Figure 7* is an example of one
measurement.

Once the code for making the measurement was checked and debugged, the
basic resistance measurement is in a loop that measures the resistance
versus time. *Figures 8 & 9* show a run where the resistance is
repeated. From running the program versus time, the standard deviation
of the resistance measurements is about 0.1 Î©.

![Figure 9: The data in Figure 8 as a histogram. A normal distribution
matching the average and standard deviation is
shown.](../Figures/2022-05-24-1700-01.png){width="3.4in"
height="2.2665in"}

## The Hardware

![Figure 10: Circuit wired for resistance measurement. The sample is
attached by a pair of twisted wires to the
circuit.](../Illustrations/Circuit-2Wire.jpg "fig:"){width="3.5in"
height="3.9902in"}A picture of the circuit is in *Figure 10*. The sample
is a 68 Î© resistor. You can see the wires are tightly twisted and
soldered to a two pin connector.

To wire the circuit:

-   Wire the 3.3V to the "+" power rail (red.)
-   Wire pin GND to the blue "-" ground rail (black.)
-   Wire the DAC, pin 18 to the 100 Î© sensing resistor. Also wire that
    end of the resistor to pin DIO5 which is V0. They are the yellow
    wires in the figure.
-   Finally the last wire of the sample connector is wired to ground,
    the "-" ground rail (black.)

## The Code

A lot of the code is the same as the previous project. The file is
*****meas********2W********Resis.py*****. I will just highlight the new
code. The code below does a fit to a straight line and weights the fit
by the uncertainty in the y-coordinate. Since I did not use numpy
because only a subset of *****numpy***** is available as the
*****ulab***** library. Instead I use the *****array***** library so I
have to explicitly loop over the data. The function returns the best fit
values for the intercept and slope and the covariance matrix.

\# Do linear fit

def linReg(n, x, y, sigY):

\"\"\"linReg - linear fit with returned uncertainties.\"\"\"

invSigY2 = 0

S = 0.0

Sx = 0.0

Sy = 0.0

Sxx = 0.0

Sxy = 0.0

for i in range(n):

invSigY2 = 1.0 / (sigY\[i\] \* sigY\[i\])

S += invSigY2

Sx += x\[i\] \* invSigY2

Sy += y\[i\] \* invSigY2

Sxx += x\[i\] \* x\[i\] \* invSigY2

Sxy += x\[i\] \* y\[i\] \* invSigY2

Delta = S \* Sxx - Sx \* Sx

a = (Sxx \* Sy - Sx \* Sxy) / Delta

b = (S \* Sxy - Sx \* Sy) / Delta

varA = Sxx / Delta

varB = S / Delta

covAB = -Sx / Delta

return (a, b, varA, varB, covAB)

Next is the function that returns the resistance. First I create arrays
for intermediate data and define *****first*****.

\# Make arrays for data

ISamp = array(\'f\', nCounts \* \[0.0\])

VSamp = array(\'f\', nCounts \* \[0.0\])

sigV = array(\'f\', nCounts \* \[0.0\])

first = True \# Boolean to print nGood only once

The next part of the code loops over the DAC values. If you are not
familiar with ***enumerate()***, it is an iterator over an array, but it
returns two values: a counting index, here the variable ***i***, and the
next array value, ***out***. Next, the first time it is called, it
prints the number of data points used in the linear fit. Finally it
calculates the uncertainty in the resistance as the square root of the
variance and returns both the fit value and its uncertainty.

def measureR():

global first, ISamp, VSamp, sigV

\# Collect the data into arrays

nGood = 0

for (i, out) in enumerate(range(0, countsMax, countsInc)):

dac.value = out

sleep(tADC)

(V0, dV0) = readADC(v0)

if out \> 4000 and V0 \< 2.65:

(V1, dV1) = readADC(v1)

ISamp\[nGood\] = (V0 - V1) / rSens

VSamp\[nGood\] = V1

sigV\[nGood\] = sqrt(dV0 \* dV0 + dV1 \* dV1)

if debug:

print(f\"{out}, {ISamp\[nGood\]}, {VSamp\[nGood\]}, {sigV\[nGood\]}\")

nGood += 1

\# On first call print the number of data points

if first:

first = False

print(f\"\# {nGood} good points\")

\# Fit data to a line

(a, resis, varA, varB, covAB) = linReg(nGood, ISamp, VSamp, sigV)

uncResis = sqrt(varB)

if debug:

print(f\"\# Resistance = {resis:.2f}, {uncResis:.2f}\")

\# Return resistance and uncertainty

return (resis, uncResis)

Finally the code below is the main loop that takes data. The function
monotonic() returns the number of seconds since the microcontoller
booted. The entire loop is in a *****try***** -- *****finally*****
structure. The reason for this is to release the pins when the program
is stopped with a *****\<Ctrl>C***** keystroke.

\# Loop forever taking data

\# Stop with \^C

t0 = monotonic()

try:

while True:

while monotonic() \< t0 + loopTime:

sleep(0.01)

t0 += loopTime

(R, sigR) = measureR()

print(f\"{monotonic():.1f}, {R:.2f}, {sigR:.2f}\")

finally:

\# Clean up

print(\"\# Cleaning up\")

dac.deinit()

v0.deinit()

v1.deinit()

# Project 3 -- Resistance versus Temperature

The final step is to use a breakout board to measure the sample
temperature with a thermocouple. A Type K thermocouple has a useful
range of -200 ^o^C (73 K) to 1350 ^o^C. They are nice because they can
be used for liquid nitrogen experiments. Thermocouples are hard to use
without specialized circuits, but don't fear! They are nicely handled
with a \$16 breakout board like [this
one](https://www.adafruit.com/product/4101). We are going to add this to
the previous project.

## Hardware

![Figure 11: The complete
circuit.](../Illustrations/Circuit-2WireTemp-1.jpg "fig:"){width="3.4in"
height="2.1201in"}![Figure 12: Close up of the wiring including the
thermocouple breakout
board.](Pictures/1000000000000FA000000BB87BBEFEC5A1E4A478.jpg "fig:"){width="3.4in"
height="2.55in"}The overall device is shown in *Figure 11*, a close up
of the wiring is in *Figure 12*.

The wiring is the same as the previous plus:

-   Plug the breakout board into the breadboard.
-   Wire S2Mini pin DIO33 to the DO (Data Out) pin on the breakout board
    (green wire.)
-   Wire S2Mini pin DIO35 to the SCL pin on the breakout board (white.)
-   Wire S2Mini pin DIO37 to the CS pin on the breakout board (blue.)
-   Wire the 3.3V pin of the S2Mini across to the red "+" power rail on
    the breadboard (red.)
-   Wire the breakout board VIN to the "+" power rail (red.)
-   Put a bare wire between the VIN and 3V3 pins on the breakout board.
    (This can't be seen in the figure because it is underneath the
    breakout board.
-   Wire the GND pin on the breakout board to the "-" ground rail on the
    breadboard (black.)
-   Screw the thermocouple into the breakout board. Once it is running,
    hold the thermocouple. If the temperature goes down, switch .

## The Code

The code is in file ***meas******2W******RvsT.py***. In addition to the
code for *Project 2* it has the following code:

import digitalio

import busio

import adafruit_max31855

import microcontroller

import watchdog

The first three lines import libraries needed for the MAX31855 breakout
board. For a description of how this code was developed, see the
appendix in the handout *2022-mBFY-Introduction*.

spi = busio.SPI(board.IO35, board.IO36, board.IO33)

cs = digitalio.DigitalInOut(board.IO37)

max31855 = adafruit_max31855.MAX31855(spi, cs)

The first line defines the SPI interface using the pins designated. The
second line defines the chip select pin. The last line uses the AdaFruit
library for this breakout board. I chose this board because it is only
for Type K thermocouples. If you have a different type of thermocouple
or a platinum resistance thermometer, there are other boards you can
use.

The first three lines import libraries needed for the MAX31855 breakout
board. For a description of how this code was developed, see the
appendix in the handout *2022-mBFY-Introduction*. Once the breakout
board is ready reading the temperature is as simple as reading the value
of *****max31855.temperature*****. Easy peasy!

The code allows the user to enter a comment that is stored in the data
file, but I didn't want the code to hang up if the data be taken
remotely. The solution is a *watchdog* timer. You set the watchdog and
if it isn't fed or canceled, it goes off and does some contingent
action. Here is the code around getting a comment:

wdt = microcontroller.watchdog

wdt.timeout = 10

wdt.mode = watchdog.WatchDogMode.RAISE

try:

comment = input(\"Enter comment: \")

except watchdog.WatchDogTimeout as e:

comment = \"No comment\"

wdt.deinit()

It sets the watchdog with a 10 second timeout. It set the mode of the
watchdog to raise an exception. If you don't set the mode, the
microcontoller is completely reset!

Now the line getting a comment is in a ***try*** -- ***except***
structure. If no comment is entered in 10 seconds, it sets the comment
to "no comment".

Finally the watchdog is deinitialized, or turned off.

print(f\"{monotonic():.1f}, {R:.2f}, {sigR:.2f},
{max31855.temperature:.2f}\")

Finally, getting the temperature is easy. The dynamic variable
***max31855.temperature*** retrieves the thermocouple temperature.

# An Experiment

![Figure 13: The temperature versus time of the
experiment.](Pictures/10000201000003840000025877DC71B2986FFF20.png "fig:"){width="3.4in"
height="2.2661in"}With the setup as built I measured the resistance
versus temperature. I do not know what type of resistor it is in the
device. I taped the sample and thermocouple wires together to the
thermocouple was about 2 mm away from the sample.

*Figure 13* shows the temperature versus time as I cooled and heated the
sample and thermocouple.

The result is shown in *Figure 14*. The temperature coefficient of
resistance is -168 ppm/Â°C. (ppm is parts per million.)

![Figure 14: Resistance versus temperature. The temperature coefficient
of resistance is about -200
ppm/Â°C.](Pictures/1000020100000546000003844E1B32886ADD1816.png "fig:"){width="3.4in"
height="2.2701in"}Finally, *Figure 14* shows the resistance is
temperature dependent. The temperature dependence is usually give as ppm
(Parts Per Million) per degree Celsius. The value of about -200
ppm/****Â°****C. I do not know what type of resistor this is, but, for
example, carbon film resistors are quoted as having a temperature
coefficient of -200 ppm/****Â°****C, ****so this value is right on that
value, probably just a change occurance.****

# Extension Project: Four-Wire Conductivity Measurement

![Figure 15: Schematic for a four-wire resistance measurement. The
R~wire~\'s represent potentially long wires of unknown
resistance.](Pictures/10000201000001E500000184B116D3A7D455C282.png "fig:"){width="3in"
height="2.4in"}The next project will use the microcontoller to measure
the resistance (inverse of the conductivity) of a device. If you want to
put the device some distance away, like in a cryostat, the resistance of
the wires would be added to the resistance of the device. This can be
significant for some experiments. A standard, and very clever, method to
avoid the added resistance of the wire is to use a *four-point*
measurement technique.

The basic idea,* Figure 5*,* *is that you two wires to supply current
through the sample, and two different wires to measure the voltage
across the sample as close to the sample as possible. Voltage
measurements are be made with only tiny amounts of current, so the ohmic
loss in the voltage-measuring wires is insignificant. Also since tiny
currents flow through the voltage measuring circuit, nearly all of the
current measured flowing through the sensing resistor also flows through
the sample.

So

$$I_{\mathit{sample}} = \frac{V_{0} - V_{1}}{R_{\mathit{sense}}}$$

and

.![Figure 16: A plot of V0, V1, and V3 versus DAC
counts.](Pictures/1000020100000288000001B0764AB7DA691655A5.png "fig:"){width="4in"
height="2.6701in"}

We will step V~DAC~ from 0 to 3.3V, so a graph of *V*~*sample*~ versus
*I*~*sample*~ should be a straight line with a slope of *R*~*sample*~.

I wired this circuit up with a 100 Î© sense resistor and about 69 Î© for
the sample.

*Figure 6* shows a graph of *V*~*0*~ and *V*~*1*~ versus *DAC* setting.
You can see at counts less than about 4000 the curves flattens out or
slightly rise. I believe this is an effect of the pull up resistor. At
the higher end, the voltage does not go above 2.65 V. I believe this is
a limit of the ADC. In between the two graphs look linear. In the
software I will limit the data to DAC counts greater than 4000 and
voltages less than 2.65.

In the software I actually average some number of ADC readings together
at each DAC step. This gives more accuracy to each data point and I
calculate the standard deviation for the point, so I also have an
uncertainty estimate for each point.

![Figure 17: Linear fit of V_sample versus I_sample.
](Pictures/1000020100000288000001B0FF2F893D123573F9.png "fig:"){width="4in"
height="2.6665in"}I do a linear fit with uncertainty to the data. This
gives both a measurement of the sample resistance, but also an
uncertainty estimate for the resistance. *Figure 7* is an example of one
measurement.

Once the code for making the measurement was checked and debugged, the
basic resistance measurement is in a loop that measures the resistance
versus time. *Figures 8 & 9* show a run where the resistance is
repeated. From running the program versus time, the standard deviation
of the resistance measurements is about 0.1 Î©.

![Figure 19: The data in Figure 8 as a histogram. The data appears to be
normally
distributed.](Pictures/1000020100000288000001B0A9D03C97518C88C9.png){width="3.4in"
height="2.2665in"}

## The Hardware

![Figure 20: Circuit wired for four-point resistance measurement. The
sample is attached by a bundle of four twisted wires to the
circuit.](Pictures/100000000000054F0000060FA1661813705C57A4.jpg "fig:"){width="3.5in"
height="3.9902in"}A picture of the circuit is in *Figure 10*. The sample
is a 68 Î© resistor. You can see there are two wires soldered to each end
of the resistor. The four wired are tightly twisted and soldered to a
four pin connector.

To wire the circuit:

-   Wire pin GND to the blue "-" ground rail.
-   Wire the DAC, pin 18 to the 100 Î© sensing resistor. Also wire that
    end of the resistor to pin DIO5 which is V0. They are the yellow
    wires in the figure.
-   The other end of the sensing resistor is wired to both the sample
    connector and pin DIO7, V1 (green.)
-   The second wire of the sample connector is wired to pin DIO9, V2
    (blue.)
-   The third wire of the sample connector is wired to pin DIO11, V3
    (white.)
-   Finally the last wire of the sample connector is wired to ground,
    the "-" ground rail (black.)

## The Code

The code has some straightforward changes, using four ADC values to
calculate *I*~*sample*~ and *V*~*sample*~. The code file is
***meas4WRvsT_22a.py***.

# Extensions

1)  The ESP32S2 has a built-in WiFi, so you can program it to connect
    with a WiFi and post its data to a cloud server. A popular protocol
    is MQTT, and a freee server I use is <https://io.adafruit.com/>.

2)  The DAC on the S2Mini has issues like not going down to 0V and not
    being linear versus the counts. These are probably related issues.
    There are two ways to improve this:

    a)  ![Figure 21: An op amp circuit to buffer the S2Mini
        DAC.](Pictures/1000000000000866000005A6631C609F22BBEAAF.jpg "fig:"){width="2.4547in"
        height="1.6535in"}*Figure 13* shows how to wire the DAC to
        ground with a lower resistance, like 100 Î©, then use an op amp
        to provide a low impedance voltage source. I love the MCP6022 op
        amp. It works on 3.3 V supply, has rail to rail input and
        output, comes in plastic DIP that plugs into breadboards, and
        has a gain-bandwidth of 10 MHz. It is a good practice to wire a
        1 uF capacitor from 3.3 V to GND at the op amp.

1)  a)  You can use an external DAC output board to provide the voltage
        to the circuit. These board cost less than \$10. See
        <https://www.adafruit.com/product/935>

The ADC part of the circuit can also be improved:

1)  ![Figure 22: Instrumentation amplifiers for measuring Vsens and
    Vsample.
    ](Pictures/10000201000002F6000001CD1CD4C99DEF5BCC68.png "fig:"){width="4in"
    height="2.4299in"}Instrumentation amplifiers can be used for more
    accurate differential measurements of the voltage across R*sens* and
    the sample, *Figure 8*. For low resistance samples the gain of the
    amplifier measuring the sample can be increase up to G = 1000.
    Figure 8 is a schematic from a high T~c~ superconductor experiment
    using a different microcontroller. (The Teensy 3.2 is my favorite
    microcontroller for critical applications. It does not have a
    version of CircuitPython, but you can run MicroPython on it.)
2)  For working down to cryogenic temperatures a platinum resistance
    thermometer can be used. The* 4-POINT TC EXPERIMENT KIT *from
    <https://quantumlevitation.com/> has a PT-100 (100 Î©) resistor built
    in. You can program the microcontroller to measure its resistance or
    use a PRT breakout board like
    <https://www.adafruit.com/product/3328> which is connected to the
    microcontroller with a SPI protocol.
3)  For a simple cryostat, use a *sand cryostat*. A sand cryostat is
    just an insulated foam cooler full of sand. You bury your experiment
    in the sand, pour liquid nitrogen in until it stops violently
    boiling and wait. It takes 5+ hours to warm back up to room
    temperature, so that makes a very nice run for high T~c~
    superconductor measurements.
4)  You can modify the code to measure the I-V curve for a diode. This
    opens the door for measuring V~forward~ in LED's to get Plank's
    constant or measuring the bandgap of a diode versus temperature.
5)  ![Figure 23: Bipolar transistor curve
    trace.](Pictures/1000000000000263000001F7E5C9A76A1BC7DE78.png "fig:"){width="2.8638in"
    height="2.3583in"}You can make a transistor characterizing device.
    You would also wire the second DAC, pin 17 on the inside row, to
    provide a base voltage, then trace out the emitter-collector
    response versus base voltage, like in *Figure 23*.
